[MUSIC PLAYING]
The all-powerful businessman
contemplated his work.
The market had expanded his
empire to encompass the Earth.
Resources were being exploited
as never before.
However, many riches still
eluded him, riches that a few
dreamers naively attempted to
withhold from the market in
the name of the common good.
For the businessman, this notion
of the common good had
become the single obstacle
standing between him and his
ultimate goal, to transform
the entire planet into a
commodity and declare
the total market.
So he set off on a business
trip that would change the
face of the Earth.
Since the beginning of time,
the amount of water on the
Earth had remained unchanged.
The same could not be said,
however, for its quality.
The businessman, a master at
exploiting scarcity, believed
there was no longer a choice.
It was time to make water a
commodity and let the market's
invisible hand regulate
its trade.
Looking at the water situation
around the world, we very fast
begin to realize that there was
a shortage of water all
over the planet.
And with this lake here, I mean,
it's a very unique lake,
very good quality of water.
And we just got the idea of
looking to do something with
it, to get it out and
to market the water.
Like the flow from Gisborne
Lake, of course, it's 100
million cubic meters a year.
So we were looking at taking
25 million, which is
one-quarter of the flow
from the lake.
If you try to stockpile it,
where's it going to go?
Can't be done.
It's going to go anyway.
I think that if you say there's
an excess of water,
that you're taking a
very narrow view
of what water does.
Really, what that freshwater
does, when it reaches the
ocean, is it floats on top
of the salt water.
And as it moves out, it mixes
up the nutrients and
everything that is in the salty
water down below and
makes the places where rivers
flow in, those estuaries,
very, very productive.
I had to do two-and-a-half
or three-year
environmental-impact study.
And anybody else that want to
take water from Newfoundland
or anywhere else are going to
have to do the same studies.
This all has to be done.
And then, if there's available
water, if it's a surplus of
water, then we should sell it.
It should go.
We should do it.
Any province that starts to
export bulk water for
commercial purposes basically
triggers the North American
Free Trade Agreement.
Therefore, water will become a
tradable commodity just like
anything else, cars, or widgets,
or whatever else.
That means that you
can't favor your
domestic private sector.
You'll have to allow American
corporations in.
That means you can't just say
one province can export it,
but others can't.
That means that once the tap
is turned on to the United
States or other NAFTA
countries, we
can't turn it off.
We can't diminish it.
We can only allow it
to become greater.
And we can place no
environmental restrictions on
that, because that's a good
between the two countries.
Today, of course, the
moratorium is on.
But the federal government seems
to be not so hard to
stand on bulk water anymore.
I think they're beginning to
realize that we have a
resource here that's
worth some money.
And I think it's a good thing.
It's almost like saying that
you're not going to sell your
water is almost like saying
Saudi Arabia saying, look,
we're not going to
sell our oil.
It's the same thing.
We speak of these things
as resources.
And we do the same thing with
iron, and copper, and nickel,
and things like this.
But in all of these sorts of
things, you have a choice.
If you don't use the iron, well,
maybe the nickel would
do as well.
Or if you don't use the oil,
well maybe gas or something
would do as well.
But water, water is very, very
different from this, because
there is no alternative.
There is only water.
It is the essential ingredient
of life.
If you don't have water,
you don't have life.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
When there was more water, once
it subsided, people would
plant squash, melons, corn.
All that's finished now.
There's no more agriculture, no
more fish since the river
disappeared.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
The water used to rise all
the way to this post.
We needed a barrier to
protect against it.
There was lots of it.
Back in those days, the
river was twice as
wide as it is today.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
And why is there
no more water?
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
Oh, it's because the United
States holds it back, so it
doesn't come.
This is a man-made
delivery canal.
It's called the All-American
Canal, and it takes water from
the Colorado River to the
Imperial Irrigation District.
This canal takes so much water
that it, more than any other
canal, or many other structures
on the Colorado
River, is the fundamental cause
of the death of the
Colorado River.
This is the Imperial Valley
Irrigation District, located
in one of the driest deserts
in the world.
In an area that gets less than
three inches of rainfall a
year, you have crops
like alfalfa, and
wheat, and many livestock.
It's a huge landscape
of agribusiness.
It's not agriculture.
It's agribusiness, on top of the
former desert ecosystem.
There is no living with
the ecosystem.
This is a place where resources
are exploited, and
the goods are taken elsewhere
for market.
So it's not a question of
people needing water.
It's a question of big business
needing water.
Water belongs to the ecosystem
from which it comes.
That's the only way to look at
water if we are to balance
conservation of the ecosystem
with use.
Instead, people, especially in
the United States, look upon
water only as a commodity, only
something to use for profit.
And when that mentality is held
up so high, you lose all
other values.
I think it's time that we had
a little drink of Gisborne
Lake, very clear, cool water.
That's a very good water.
There's no doubt.
I would recommend
it to anybody.
We do have to ask ourselves what
we owe as a water-rich
country to the rest
of the world.
We have to have that debate
within the framework of water
as part of the commons.
Should it be priced?
I don't know.
Let's talk about it, but not
if it's going to some
bottom-line investor to
make a profit from.
Should it be sold and traded?
No.
Should it be shared?
Maybe, but it should be shared
on humanitarian grounds.
What these corporations are
talking about, what these
businessmen are talking about,
what the trade agreements are
talking about, is taking water
as a common good, to making it
a private commodity and then
controlling it and selling it
for profit.
This means that that water
will get to those
corporations, or those cities,
or those places that can
afford to buy it.
And it will never get to the
millions and millions of the
world's people who are
desperately needing it.
[MAN SINGING]
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
The birds that you here,
they're just like us.
They've been denied the right
to water as well.
The little water that makes it
this far is barely enough to
survive on.
If there's no water,
we can't live.
Even the air no longer belongs
to us, because it's polluted.
Today, nothing is treated
with respect anymore.
For us, water was something
that is sacred.
But for the others, it's
just a commodity.
And the businessman contemplated
his work, and saw
that it was good for
the shareholders.
Often during his travels, the
businessman would become very
annoyed by the bothersome
ability
of plants to reproduce.
Then, an extraordinarily
bold idea came to him.
To put an end to this wasteful
situation, the businessman
decreed that from that time
forward, seeds and all they
begat would become
private property.
Well, here, look.
Well, for Pete's sakes,
look here again.
It's all over again,
the same as 1997.
Look at all the canola plants
that are growing here.
One plant like this will produce
from four to 10,000
seeds the next year.
So this field, if I don't
cultivate it or use some
special chemical, it will
be totally polluted with
Monsanto's Roundup
Ready canola.
Monsanto can come out with a
genetic-altered canola plant,
put it into the environmental,
damage and destroy my seed,
and then get a lawsuit against
because you're letting it grow
on your land.
Because they ruled, it
doesn't matter how it
gets on your land.
If it blows in, or cross
pollinates, or falls off of
farm equipment, it's Monsanto's
property.
The judge said that I must
give the seed and
the plant to Monsanto.
How can I give millions and
millions of plants in
my field all over?
How am I supposed to
get the plants out
and give it to Monsanto?
It's impossible.
What gives Monsanto the right in
the first place to receive
permission to get a patent
on a life-giving form?
If we plant the seed the first
time, when it reproduces, the
second time, they should no
longer have a claim to that.
Because they didn't
reproduce it.
The farmer reproduced it.
And the farmer really
didn't produce it.
It was nature.
It was the sun, the soil, and
basically an act of God.
I can't make a seed grow.
Monsanto can't make
a seed grow.
Only nature can make
Whether or not you can invent
life is a different question
from whether or not you
can invent a new seed.
In order to be patentable, the
subject matter, a new seed,
must be new, it must be
useful, and it must be
non-obvious.
And it is certainly possible
to develop innovations in
seeds through a variety of
techniques, including
recombinant DNA and
biotechnology, but
not limited to those.
And if you want to increase
innovation of that sort,
patents are a very effective
way of doing so.
The multinational companies
like Monsanto do not want
farmers to use their own seed.
They want a farmer to
come back and buy
their seed every year.
Then you have to buy
their chemicals.
You've got to pay $15-an-acre
technology charge.
You got to sign an agreement
that you never
use your own seed.
So it takes the complete rights
away from a farmer.
Monsanto's police force can
come on your land--
we call them Gene Police--
and go on your land for three
years after you have grown it,
go in your granaries, check your
fields, go and check the
seed in your granaries to see
if you're not cheating.
If Monsanto has to lower itself
to a gutter-type level
of a policy to sell their
product, and in selling their
product need a police force,
something is wrong with their
thinking and their policy
of a company.
To me, it's just plain
wrong, wrong, wrong.
No one compels a farmer to
choose one seed over another.
He or she always retains
the freedom to choose.
If a farmer finds the right or
privilege of saving seed to
replant it more valuable to
him or her, then the added
value that he or she will get
from planting seed that they
purchase every year from a
company which holds a patent,
then they're free to do so.
They destroyed 53 years'
work of seed
development that I had done.
And my seed was resistant to
some of the diseases that we
have here on the prairies
in canola.
All that is destroyed.
I've phoned up two
seed companies in
the last three weeks.
I said I want a pure,
conventional,
non-GMO canola seed.
And they laughed at me.
They said there is
no such thing.
They will not guarantee it.
The companies have succeeded
in contaminating all the
canola supplies in Canada.
So there is no such
thing as choice.
Well, the idea that farmers have
a choice under a system
controlled by corporations
is totally false.
Because the corporations
first ensure that
farmers lose their seed.
They go into regions and buy
up all the traditional
varieties, then sell
their own seed.
They deliberately create
a seed famine.
And I have witnessed it, in
regions where the corporations
have entered in India, the
creation of a seed famine
where only one kind of
crop is available.
And the farmers have
nothing left.
In that condition, to say the
farmers have a choice is as
false as it is to tell a bonded
laborer that they have
a choice to go and
work anywhere.
The idea of Navdanya as a
commitment, my commitment, for
the rest of my life is,
basically, to have a
biodiversity sanctuary, both
to preserve, conserve, the
diverse species that
we are losing.
But not just to conserve them as
a museum, not just to have
it in museumized form, but to
have them as seeds that
farmers can collect and go into
self-sufficiency, go in
to sustainability.
[SPEAKING HINDI]
For me, it was absolutely key
for the defense of the plants'
freedom and the defense of
farmers' freedom, to have
seeds that were free, free of
patents, free of genetic
manipulation.
And to us, Navdanya is an
expression of the continued
freedom of nature to evolve on
her terms, as well as the
farmers', to be free of being
bonded to the few handful of
giant corporations that want to
own every aspect of life,
of the life of the planet
and our own lives.
A simple calculation that
activists have done worldwide
shows that patents
on seed, and this
would be pirated patents.
Because most of the genetic
resources and biodiversity
which is being patented comes
from the Third World.
Patents would increase the debt
burden on Third-World
countries tenfold.
The Third World has already
reached its limits of survival
with the present debt.
The debt created by this
piracy would wipe out
possibilities of life under
conditions of poverty that
have been created through
colonialism and various ways
of ingenious transfer
of wealth from
the poor to the rich.
And this is the last
attempt being made.
Forever in search of new
territories to conquer, the
businessman turned to things
infinitely small, the
territories that lie within
the human body.
The fabric of life represented
a new opportunity for profit.
The market's invisible
hand should be
allowed to extract it.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
Myriad Genetics has patented a
test for the predisposition of
breast and ovarian cancer based
on analysis of the BRCA1
gene sequence.
This is one of the breast cancer
susceptibility genes.
So Mryiad basically patented
the reference sequence,
meaning the standard or norm.
Anyone using this reference
sequence, regardless of the
method used, is infringing
on Myriad's
industrial property rights.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
We decided to oppose this
monopoly, because conducting
these genetic tests is
something necessary.
In the short term, for the
treatment of women at risk,
but also over the longer term
to improve this treatment.
And that's why a monopoly would
restrict the research
carried out.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
My grandmother died
of ovarian cancer,
following breast cancer.
My mother died 25 years ago of
breast cancer, and my sister
died of breast cancer
four years ago.
So earlier this year when I
discovered that I had cancer,
I wasn't overly surprised.
I learned that the cancer was
hereditary through the test
offered by Dr. Stoppa-Lyonnet
in the genetic oncology
department.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
That radically changed my
perception of the disease,
because although three
generations of the family had
been inflicted, we had,
nonetheless, carried this
burden without understanding
why.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
By taking the test, I came away
with answers about my
family situation.
But I also hope it will
contribute to the research
being done in this area, the
area of predictive medicine.
Once you have the other
blood sample--
I was part of a Cancer Genetics
Network, which is a
grant-funded operation for eight
cancer centers in the
United States.
It's funded by National
Cancer Institute.
And my involvement in that
project was to set up a core
lab so that we can offer genetic
testing for all the
cancer sequencing of the genes
for all the research projects
that will go through this
Cancer Genetics Network.
And that definitely included
BRCA1 and 2 testing also.
But a year later, we got a
letter from the company,
Myriad Genetics, which has
the patent on BRCA1 gene.
They sent us this letter and
saying that we are infringing
on their patent,
so we stopped.
If you can come up with a method
which is as good as
sequencing but less expensive,
there needs to be research
that goes to develop
such techniques.
But at the moment, even if you
come up with such a technique,
you cannot use it.
Because you'll be stopped
because of the patent.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
I think that a new and important
debate is coming.
This time it will be about
using the sequence for
prevention and treatment.
If another company or business
perfects a drug that allows
for the prevention of breast
cancers, and specifically,
cancers linked to an alteration
of the BRCA1 gene,
then Myriad would have rights
over that invention.
This patent has raised the
entire issue of the patent
ability of genes and their
future application, since
we're dealing with
the future here.
This is a very expensive
business.
To produce this drug at the end
of this effort is about
$500 million.
If you do not have strong patent
protection, not only
for the drug at the end of the
pipeline, but also for the
intellectual property that's
involved in identifying the
gene and its function,
nobody is going to
partake in this effort.
At the turn of the last century
when the chemists were
isolating the chemical elements
in the periodic
table, they and their companies
put a lot of time
and research into it.
But we didn't allow them to
claim patents on the actual
products in the periodic
table.
We allowed them process
patents.
Those are patents on the
processes they used to isolate
the chemical elements
in nature.
But can you imagine any country
allowing a patent on
helium, oxygen, aluminum,
hydrogen, titan--
It's ridiculous.
We didn't allow it.
Simply stated, these are
discoveries of nature.
The genes are exactly
analogous.
By what stretch of the
imagination can a biotech
company say they invented a
gene that's the result of
millions of years
of evolution?
The breast cancer gene, the
cystic fibrosis gene, the
Huntington Korea gene, these
are discoveries of nature.
Therefore, no matter what amount
of money they put into
it, it's not an invention.
Therefore, it doesn't qualify.
Any of this genetics research
is not valid unless the
patient chooses to participate
in that.
It's their genetic material that
the researchers study to
find out what's the defect,
what causes the disease.
Now, if the patient is told at
that point that, yes, today
your blood will be used
to find a gene
that causes your disease.
But tomorrow, that information
will be available to you only
if you agree to buy
that service from
a particular company.
I don't know how many of those
patients would want to
participate in this research.
And I think that's
the bottom line.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
This gene is part of who I am.
And even if it is the smallest
entity in the human body, it's
an integral part of my
physical makeup.
I also share it with
other families.
So it's mine, and it isn't.
And in the broadest sense,
it's common property.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
It represents something that I
inherited from my mother, and
she inherited it from
her mother.
It's what we call
the gene pool.
And it's a term, a notion,
which, in my opinion, has no
place in business.
Because it would then mean
that the human body has a
market value.
Now imagine our children, if
they grow up in a world where
they think of human beings at
the conceptual stages of
invention when they think of the
genes, the proteins, the
cells, the organs, the tissues,
and even whole
species as inventions.
What happens to the intrinsic
value of life when our
children's generation grows up
to believe that life is simply
utility, intellectual
property?
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
The original purpose of patents
was to serve the
public interest, that of
investors and their
investment, and that of
researchers and patients, to
allow for better treatments.
But today, as we see with
Myriad Genetics, we're
witnessing a shift
in the rights
conferred by these patents.
And we're no longer in the
realm of public interest.
I think we need to do the
right thing, here.
The right thing is we need
to understand the
gene pool is a commons.
It's a trust.
It's our responsibility as
part of the legacy of
evolution on this planet.
We ought to treat it with
that kind of respect.
We should craft a great treaty
to establish the gene pool--
micro, plant, animal,
and human--
as a shared responsibility in
which all the governments of
the world become the signatories
to this idea of
the gene pool as a commons.
If this patent policy is not
challenged, in less than 10-15
years, giant life-science
companies well actually own
the genetic blueprints
of the human species.
And they will increasingly own
the genetic blueprints of all
of the other species
that make up
millions of years of evolution.
That gives them tremendous power
to dictate the terms
upon which the rest of us enter
the age of biology, the
biotech century.
For some time, the businessman
had set his sights on the
public services.
He had patiently put into place
the shortages necessary
to achieve his goal.
The moment had come.
From now on, disease would
become a business opportunity,
and suffering a source
of profit.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
So where is it you're
preparing to go?
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
I'm going to the hospital, St.
Mary's Hospital, not too far
from here, for a
hip operation.
The surgeon explained to me.
He said, if it was up to me, I'd
operate on you tomorrow.
That's what he said.
But that was eight months ago,
yes, a full eight months ago.
Ah, but you know,
the budget cuts.
He said that before the budget
cuts, he could do three such
operations a week.
But now, he's only allowed
to do one a week.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
But you have to understand
that the pain of
osteoarthritis is horrible.
It's violent pain
day and night.
And the nights, at least in my
case, are worse than the days.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
The waiting lists are a result
of political decisions made by
the government.
With all of the budget cuts
in health care, hospital
closings, forced retirement of
doctors and nurses, everything
has been done to save money on
the backs of the people and
their health.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
The rationale of the government
is that it has to
achieve a zero deficit.
But at the same time, it's
investing more and more in big
corporations, contending that
it's good for the economy.
That's not true.
It's just a way to siphon money
away from the public
system and give it to big
business, and at the same
time, to force people to
consider going private for
their health care.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
People want the services, and
they expect to receive
high-quality care.
They want to receive the
treatment that best meets
their needs.
They receive this kind of
service from veterinarians for
their pets.
And clearly, in some cases, they
have difficulty receiving
the same level of service
in the public sector.
[SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
If Quebecers and Canadians
want the latest in health
care, if they want quick access
to medical care and
magnetic imaging, and if, at the
same time, they don't want
to see their taxes increased
exponentially or at least
significantly, then I think
that private care will
continue to expand.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
The governments say, but we
can reduce your taxes.
By how much?
A few hundred dollars, or
even $1,000 or $2,000?
But we'll have to pay $12,000 a
year for private insurance.
And we don't even know whether
the insurance companies will
sell us insurance if we're
too old, too sick,
or too poor to pay.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
[SIDE CONVERSATION]
This is an inner-city public
Montessori elementary school.
And once a week, the school
gives us space, and we run a
free clinic.
In a country that is so rich,
still there's so many people--
there's over 40 million people
here without insurance--
who don't have access
to health care.
[SPEAKING SPANISH]
At the same time that you have
these brilliant technological
advances, you have one of the
highest infant mortalities in
the developed world.
And that's because we have
a small group who can get
brilliant advances, and
many people who
have access to nothing.
He's got a pretty
bad infection.
He needs to got to the ED.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's what I thought.
So, let's call a taxi.
OK.
We don't even need to go there.
This shoe, it's amazing.
Look at this thing.
That's how they were
taking care of it.
And it's not any fault
of there's.
It's just sometimes you don't
have access to the better
medical care.
We are trying to make a
difference, one person at a
time, even though we need
to make a difference
in the whole country.
Sometimes those changes take
very long to occur, or there
are powerful forces that are
preventing them, that are
going to take care of their own
vested interests, like the
insurance companies, like the
pharmaceutical companies.
I began my work in managed
care working
as a medical reviewer.
And very quickly, I was told as
a physician I was expected
to keep a certain percent of a
denial rate, that I wasn't to
trust what physicians said about
their patients, that I
was to try to find ways to keep
them out of the hospital.
And there was a dramatic moment
where a request came
across my desk that involved a
patient that required a heart
transplant in a hospital outside
of our network, which
would have been very
expensive.
We would've had to
pay full charges.
And so I was expected
to deny this.
I guess the gravity of what I
was doing was brought home
when I called his physician.
And his physician-- and
I told him, I said, we
can't approve this.
And he said, you've just issued
a death sentence.
[FLATLINE SOUND]
After years of reflection,
I realized that I, as a
physician, had caused
the death of a man.
And instead of being held
accountable, morally and
professionally, I
was promoted.
I got better jobs as
a result of it.
I was a better medical
director.
I received accolades for being
tough enough to make the kind
of economic decision that saved
a company hundreds of
thousands of dollars.
How can you leave health
to the market forces?
How can you leave someone's
health, someone's happiness,
to the market?
It's not like fish.
It's not a commodity that's
to be bought and sold.
Health is part of the right
of every individual in a
community or in a society.
It's part of a sign of a mature
society, is a society
that's ready to take
responsibility for the health
and well-being of every
individual that
lives in that country.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
At the end of the day, it
comes down to values.
What do we, as a
society, want?
Do we believe in the common
good, or do we want a system
that will provide special
care to a select few?
If that's the kind of choice
we're ready to make, then
let's do it.
But I believe the majority of
the population don't want to
sacrifice their health so that
a few corporate shareholders
can become wealthier.
And that's what the government
is doing to us.
We're in the process
of being duped.
[SPEAKING FRENCH]
The businessman had long been
wary of the state, the
political institution that
citizens had established to
assure the common good.
So he put considerable effort
into making the state work in
his interest.
But that day, the businessman
learned that the game
was far from won.
[SPEAKING PORTUGUESE]
Five years ago, Brazilian
companies, mostly the publicly
owned companies, began copying
anti-retrovirus drugs, which
according to our law,
were not patented.
[SPEAKING PORTUGUESE]
We produce these drugs and are
able to offer them at a cost
that is 80% lower than that of
the patented medications.
[SPEAKING PORTUGUESE]
The drugs we'll need next
are protected by
our new patent laws.
So we've began negotiating with
the big laboratories and
hope to reach an agreement.
[SPEAKING PORTUGUESE]
If we can't, the government has
decided to infringe on the
patents, which, by
the way, there is
provision for in the law.
In cases of national emergency,
and in the public
interest, we are authorized to
infringe on the patents.
[SPEAKING PORTUGUESE]
When I was diagnosed as HIV
positive in 1990, the drugs I
needed were not yet provided
by the government.
At that time, they cost between
$1,200 and $1,500
American a month.
[SPEAKING PORTUGUESE]
that's about what I was making
at the time, $1,200, $1,500 a
month, depending on
the exchange rate.
[SPEAKING PORTUGUESE]
In fact, the distribution of
free medication has allowed
Brazilians to live with the
virus and no longer
just die from it.
[SPEAKING PORTUGUESE]
We have seen death reduced
by about 50% since 1996.
That was when we began
the program.
[SPEAKING PORTUGUESE]
We have medications like these,
which we buy from
multinational companies.
That means they're still
making money from us.
And we have medications like
these, which are produced here
in Brazil and are generic.
For patients, there's
no cost for either.
[SPEAKING PORTUGUESE]
What choice does the Brazilian
government have if it wants to
save its people?
Can it afford not to
provide the drugs?
I believe it's obliged to
provide them by applying the
compulsory license law, which
the United States questions,
but which nonetheless is allowed
through international
agreements.
[SPEAKING PORTUGUESE]
I know that patents exist to
protect the investments made
by the companies.
But you can't lose sight
of the right to life.
No return on investment
justifies the death of a human
being anywhere in the world.
[SPEAKING PORTUGUESE]
International trade laws and
patents don't exist to protect
anyone's life.
They exist to protect the
capital of multinational
corporations.
That's capitalist
logic, right?
So to a certain extent, we're
trying to shatter this logic,
because we know that it can't
guarantee the well-being of
the population in
every respect.
[SPEAKING PORTUGUESE]
You can't consider drugs as
simply consumer products.
What we're trying to emphasize
is that the prices, and
particularly the profits
of these big
corporations, are overblown.
They have nothing at all to do
with the real value of the
product, even when profits and
future investments are taken
into account.
It's all out of proportion, and
that's the real question.
The businessman was becoming
very irritated.
Comments like these would be
of serious concern to the
shareholders.
The time for rest had
not yet come.
The businessman knew he would
have to do something to thwart
the political institutions.
On the weekend, he held
a great summit.
Fearful of being left
out, all the heads
of state came running.
The meeting agenda, kept secret
from the people, could
not have been clearer.
Abolish all national regulations
that might stand
in the way of business.
And above all, force countries
to surrender the
responsibility for the common
good to market forces, or face
severe sanctions.
The Canadian government has
agreed to pay $13 million in
damages to the American company,
Ethyl Corporation.
Ethyl produces a gasoline
additive that Canada has
judged to be harmful
to health.
The American government will
apply sanctions to the
European Union following the
ban on European imports of
hormone-treated beef.
Courier UPS has accused Canada
Post of unfair competition,
and is suing the Canadian
Government for $140 million.
A UPS victory could impact
the scope of all
Canadian social programs.
The NAFTA Tribunal has ordered
the Mexican Government to pay
$16.5 million to Metalclad, an
American company specializing
in the burial of toxic waste.
What's happening with these
trade agreements, and
particularly these Chapter 11
of NAFTA, where corporations
can, for the first time, sue
governments of another
country, what's happening
is it has created a
constitutional body of law that
overrides domestic law,
including environmental, health,
and safety laws.
So governments are basically
relinquishing their
sovereignty and their right to
establish regulations and
standards, to provide social
programs for their people, to
transnational corporations
and international trade
agreements.
And basically, they can
say, well, poor us.
It wasn't our fault.
Of course, we got elected
promising to keep public
health care.
But alas, we had to lose
it through these trade
agreements.
If we continue to enclose all
of the great ecological
comments into property owned
by a few companies, we risk
increasing geopolitical
tensions, increasing
possibilities of war, increasing
reduction of the
Earth to utility and just
to resource management.
What I'm saying here,
I want to be
clear, is we need balance.
I believe we have to
have commerce.
I believe that we need
to have a market.
But it can't be the sole arbiter
for how we relate to
each other, our common nature,
and the Earth we live in.
When commerce becomes a sole
arbiter, then we end up to be
just a crass, commercial,
utilitarian-based
civilization.
We lose our humanity.
We lose our intimacy.
We lose our empathy.
We lose what makes
life important.
If good is not common, if
there's no common good, and
there's only private good, that
private good is hurting
someone somewhere
on this planet,
some species somewhere.
When humanity works and does
agriculture as if it's the
only community that has to be
fed, and works against the
common good of other species,
we get non-sustainable
agriculture.
We eventually undermine
our own food security.
Common good is the result
of give and take.
It's a result of reciprocity.
It's a result of mutuality.
Forgetting the common
good is a result of
grabbing, piracy, and theft.
And of course, some
people prosper.
But they prosper at the cost of
others, and they prosper at
the cost of the planet.
That kind of prosperity
is not prosperity.
I believe that if we do not
maintain the concept of a
commons, that our collective
interests are served through
institutions that see us as
more than our individual
selves but as a sum of something
larger, if we don't
see natural resources in nature
as something that
belongs to the Earth and all
humanity, if we don't see that
we have certain fundamental
rights as human beings and
citizens to have social
services, social programs, if
we lose that notion of the
commons, I think we're going
to find a world in which
nothing is valued
except if it has money.
And in that kind of
world, many, many,
many people will die.
Many people are dying, because
only those who can afford to
live in that system--
can buy a clean environment, can
buy clean water, can buy
the kind of food that the rest
of the world doesn't have--
only those people will live.
So the keeping of the commons is
not only a keeping of a set
of values and of a heritage, but
without a commons, without
the notion of a commons,
we won't survive.
That day, the invisible hand
of the market showed itself
for what it was.
[MUSIC PLAYING]